We did all of Egypt.
We went down the Nile.
We spent over six weeks, as it turned out, in Cairo.
We were extending, extending, extending things on and on, and then went into the Sinai.
At dawn one day we climbed to the top of the view of the General Russo, Mount Sinai.
And from there you see the Gulf of Aqaba on one side and Gulf of Sierra on the other.
It's purquoise sparking water from the red rock and the light.
There's a line in the Zohar, the Kabbalistic book, about the light, the light is the light is the eye.
It's a commentary on Genesis, and it begins with a commentary on the phrase, what there is light.
And that light, I really never got over it.
traveling in the desert.
We traveled in the desert for about two weeks.
And I went diving.
I went diving down the wall at the Sharm el-Sheep at the tip of the Spine I've lived on.
And that light
It extends down to where normally you lose color at 80 feet or so.
But it continues to sparkle, to light up the cow, to light up the fish.
It's a wonderful guy and informed by this light which makes the visibility of 250 feet.
Having done that, I really felt
infused, haunted by light.
In any case, we ended up by crossing the Egyptian army line, which was in the days when Suez was being returned to Egypt by the Israelis who had taken it.
We maneuvered our way, military bureaucrat by military bureaucrat, through the Egyptian army line and got over the border.
Took the last bus across the Negev to Jerusalem.
We got to Jerusalem in the morning.
And Jerusalem is high and the air is here in the early morning.
And the sun was
glinting on all this rose-colored stone that the old city and the gates of the old city and the buildings in the new city are all constructed of absolutely sparkly so it was impossible to sleep because that same that same that same light coming coming so to speak from heaven would continue to inform the landscape wherever you went so we walked through
Through the Jaffa Gate and through the screen of David over to the Damascus Gate, the Damascus Gate is somehow the replication of every set that every Warner Brothers movie in 1940 tried to somehow reproduce.
full of people herding goats under the crenellated towers and people pushing wheelbarrows full of cardamom and women in chanjures and veterans in headdresses.
And you're even supplied with music since everybody's playing tapes of the latest chanjures.
and to catch all that light.
And I thought, I will hang up my shingle if I didn't write a novel sentence twice.
I knew I had to write.
I really felt that it was the city that I had to write about.
I also knew, and we were kind of altered.
It was imprinted within me.
This is the place that stands outward into an urban heaven.
This is the center of the world.
This is where all those events that are supposed to control and define the human condition took place.
So that it was not only a tremendous, there was not only a tremendous compulsion to write the novel but also a certain presumption in many ways to write it.
But I felt that I was going to do it.
And somehow I did.
I'm not altogether sure how I came from one end of that book to the other.
But there it seems to be.
So I will, I now offer it to the world for what it's worth.
I'll just read the beginning of it, if I may.
And I thought about who the characters had to be, and I knew they had to be characters that I'd normally write about, marginal people, people connected to.
The press, people whose business is informing the world about things they themselves hardly understand.
Believe me, I include myself.
and raising more questions and providing answers.
So, once I had the characters in a way, I had the story.
Jerusalem, 1992.
That morning, Lucas was awakened by bells sounding across the shoulder of Venom from the Church of the Door Mission.
At first light, there had been a Moitan's calling still on, insisting that prayer was better than sleep.
The city was well supplied with divine servants.
He climbed out of bed and went into the kitchen to brew Turkish coffee.
As he stood in the window drinking it, the first train of the day rattled past, bound over the hills for Tel Aviv.
It was a slow, decorous, colonial train, five cars and nearly empty coaches with dusty windows.
Its diminishing rhythms made him aware of his own solitaire.
When the train was gone, he saw the old man who lived in one of the Ottoman houses beside the tracks watering a trompet of kale in the early morning shade.
The kale was deep green and fleshy against the limestone rubble from which it somehow grew.
The old man wore a black pink cap.
He had high cheekbones and a runny face like a Slavic peasant's.
The sight of him made Lucas imagine vast solar fields along which trains ran, long lines of gray boxcars against the far horizon.
Once Lucas dreamed of him.
He had great fruit and toast for breakfast and read the morning's Jerusalem Post.
A border policeman had been stabbed in a Nusrat camp in the Gaza Strip, was expected to recover.
Three Palestinians had been shot to death by Shin Bet-hit squads, one in Rafa, two in Gaza City.
Haradim in Jerusalem had demonstrated against the Hebrew University's archaeological dig near the Dung Gate.
The ancient burial grounds were being uncovered.
Jesse Jackson was threatening to organize a boycott against Major League Baseball.
In India, Hindus and Muslims were fighting over a shrine that probably predated both their religions.
And in a story from Yugoslavia, he saw again the phrase ethnic cleansing.
He had come across the evocative expression once or twice during the winter.
There was also a full-page story on the number of foreign pilgrims visiting the country for Passover and Western Holy Week.
Lucas was surprised to find himself overtaken by the holidays.
He dressed and took a second cup of coffee out on his tiny balcony.
The day was innocently glorious.
Spring sunshine scented the pines and sparkled on the stone walls of Emeka Reflame.
For weeks, he had been postponing work on an article about the Sinai he had contracted to write for Condé Nast.
The deadline had passed the previous Friday, and before long, they would be phoning him for it.
Still, the fine weather inclined him to truancy.
When at last he went to his desk, his open appointment book confirmed the date, Easter Sunday in the Latin Church, and also the 16th of Nisan.
Passover had arrived the day before.
On a sudden impulse, Lucas decided to go over to the Church of the Holy Seventh.
That one in road was nearly free of traffic,
In spite of its elderly population, Lucas's neighborhood in the German colony was the most secular in the city, and his atmosphere was never one of piety.
Old couples strode in the spring sunshine.
The day before, he had seen a few young families loading their volvos for camping trips in the desert or the Galilee.
But walking up the nearly deserted avenue past the terraces of the Cinematheque, under the ramparts of the Church of Scotland Hospice, adorned with its funny blue flag,
He could feel the gravity of the ancient city across the canyons.
A hundred tour buses were parked in the streets under the old city walls.
At the distant Jaffa gate, he could see the swain forms of mounted policemen hurting a pressing crowd of bright pilgrims.
At the other end of the fortress, a line of devotees toiled a single file up the slope to the Zion gate.
He walked down into the shadow of the valley over the bridge by the Sultan's pool and past the Quranic verse carved in the shell of the Ottoman fountain.
All that is created comes in water that reigns.
Then, humbled by the looming walls, he trudged up the ascent to Zion.
On the path to Zion Gate, he walked mainly among Orthodox Jewish men in black, bound for the Western Wall.
Some of the Jews tried to converse with each other as they climbed, scrambling along the shoulder to keep pace.
Besides Saharadim, there were a few German Catholics on the path.
The Dermatian Abbey above them was a German church.
These pilgrims were of the era before Germans had become once again thin and handsome.
Many were florid and overweight, too vocally dressed and perspiring freely, yet they seemed happy.
Most of the men looked plain and decent.
They wore fidelity pins and carried missiles.
Some of the women had sweet, angelic faces.
If they were six feet, Lucas calculated, born in 1932, 13 at the end of the war.
He had picked up the habit of calculating Germans' ages from the Israelis.
It really depended on whether you were driving or walking.
Well, it was not without a certain broadness, but I don't think it was really dangerous.
The Gaza Strip turned out to be more dangerous than me in Canada.
We got caught in the Gaza Strip in July, and any party who didn't look like this belonged to the Gaza Strip or wasn't in a U.N.
car or went too far from the U.N.
car was assumed
It could be an Israeli.
It was an out-of-control situation with a riot.
That was a difficult day we had.
It was the fifth anniversary of the Antifada.
We never been over there, but we were.
And some of the time we were in a little white UN car, but there were times we weren't, he had some trouble.
But the most part, I didn't really feel it was dangerous, and I don't think most people go around with a sense of pain.
There are plenty of Israelis who continue to go to their favorite restaurant.
in the old city.
I mean, there are many.
I don't know if there's a point.
Israelis, we can say out of the non-Jewish sections of the old city.
But there are many who will go there.
I mean, they just, you know, I think that's wholeheartedly what many Israelis are like.
I mean, they like the falafel over there.
And a lot of people are making a statement about .
And some people prefer to go on, and some people prefer to go on often, because it's really very funny.
The last time was a couple of years ago.
Since 1992, I guess it must have been before.
Everything seems like two years ago.
Since, once, once, since, since 1992.
You said people go off, you said you were packing, then you were dead, you know, they were dead.
No, usually they're, usually they're, they're, they're, they're, they're carrying either a busy or, or, you know, that's what I need.
Huh?
People who have business with him and so forth are usually
carrying off very visible arms when they when they go over there um it's uh if that that accuses it going on already it really depends on what kind of space you do
I mean, there is a human rights organization, which I know, unfortunately, is called the Te Shalom.
The Te Shalom workers go into East Jerusalem, not only into the Old City, but into the Middle of the East City.
They're recognizable to the Palestinians as Israelis.
But they're often known as workers when they show off.
They would never dream of going in their arms.
And so they go right into the Gaza Strip and go right back.
And I mean, often they've got to go with a little bit of Palestinian.
They're making mistakes.
They're not coming at all.
You said the novel was driven by a sense of place.
Did you create the characters to conform with this sense of place?
Well, yes.
The characters are the people who would be there.
They have characters who would be there.
There's sort of a compromise between the place and me.
The people who would be there, who I would write without attention.
Well, Damascus Gate is also the gate that leads to the road where, you know, his divine
striking down so it's what it suggests as reversals and conversions and and conspicuity and synchronicity and heresy and all sorts of things given all the religious and political contention that focus is there you expect your book to
with any of these groups in any particular way?
Well, I was very naive if I expected it to not go out of any waters.
I can only rely on its, you know, on what I believe to be its honesty.
And it's, you know, it's... I mean, in a way, I don't know whether it's the responsibility of a novel to be fair.
Perhaps not.
But, you know, I think that...
In this case, this may end up, because of the moral imperative involved, in having been as fair as I can think of.
So, as I say, I would be naive if I was thinking of royalty in the water.
I am finally the person who has to live with what I have written.
And I am finally...
the repository of my own conscience, and I guess, ultimately, the judge of what I've written in terms of expanding.
So I, you know, I am, I feel strong in the Lord, as they say, in religious quarters.
And, you know, I think I've been royal in some orders, but I think I've been fair, and I think I've been accurate, and I think I've reflected the situation.
I don't know if I can carry the weight, but I hope so.
I ought to be.
I ought to.
Because I don't think I've done anything that anyone could do.
Thank you.
Do you feel more in touch with your Catholic-ness, Catholic-ness, and the writing of it?
I don't know.
I don't think so.
Maybe.
I don't know the answer to that.
I don't know whether I feel more in touch with it.
I mean, obviously, weddings...
But I feel more in touch as a result.
I don't know.
I really got quite dazzled by Kabbalah.
I suppose so.
Are there people there?
Yeah, I spent a lot of time on that.
A lot of, a lot of Israeli writers.
.
... ... ... ...